---
title: Resource Scopes - A beautifully simple ownership model
layout: post
---

In the process of writing a Vulkan-based game engine, I've come across a beautifully simple ownership model
that's turbo charged my progress. I'm refering to it here as a `ResourceScope`, but it's similar in concept to Arenas.
The implementation is very simple:

{% highlight c++ linenos %}

class ResourceScope {
    std::list<std::function<void()>> m_deferredCleanupCommands;

    // ... deleted constructors

public:
    ResourceScope() {}

    ~ResourceScope() {
        executeDeferredCleanupFunctions();
    }

    void addDeferredCleanupFunction(std::function<void()> func) {
        m_deferredCleanupCommands.push_back(func);
    }

    void executeDeferredCleanupFunctions() {
        while (!m_deferredCleanupCommands.empty()) {
            m_deferredCleanupCommands.back()();
            m_deferredCleanupCommands.pop_back();
        }
    }
};

{% endhighlight %}

And using it is also simple: whenever you create a resource, add a command to delete it later. For example:

{% highlight c++ linenos %}

vk::ResultValue<vk::Pipeline> GraphicsPipelineBuilder::build() {
    // ...

    vk::ResultValue<vk::Pipeline> pipelineResult = m_device.createGraphicsPipeline(
        VK_NULL_HANDLE,
        createInfo
    );

    if (pipelineResult.result != vk::Result::eSuccess)
        return vk::ResultValue<vk::Pipeline> { pipelineResult.result, VK_NULL_HANDLE };

    r_scope.addDeferredCleanupFunction([=, device = m_device, pipeline = pipelineResult.value]() {
        device.destroyPipeline(pipeline);
    });

    // ...
}

{% endhighlight %}

So this is pretty simple. Why do I like it so much. First off: functional programming! Woop!
But seriously, trying to solve scope problems from an OOP perspective is pretty messy and often
ends in existential questions of ownership, and they end up very much tied to object life times,
which, at best might not be the best way to represent scope, and at worst might lead to you destroying
resources before others which depend on them (this might be fine most of the time, especially if
destroying a resource ≈ freeing some memory, but it's against the Vulkan spec to destroy a resource
that is depended on by another un-freed resource).

With `ResourceScope`s, so long as you add clean-up functions as you create resources, you are guaranteed not to destroy resources before
others that depend on them, because to do that you'd have to create them out of order.

As an example of the difference this made, this project has a builder class to simplify making Vulkan pipelines:
`GraphicsPipelineBuilder : IBuilder<vk::ResultValue<vk::Pipeline>>`. Before adding `ResourceScope`s, it had a different type:
`GraphicsPipelineBuilder : IBuilder<vk::ResultValue<PipelineData>>`, where `PipelineData` stored various data about
a pipeline (shocking, I know).

{% highlight c++ linenos %}

struct PipelineData {
    std::vector<vk::ShaderModule> shaderModules;
    vk::PipelineLayout            pipelineLayout;
    vk::Pipeline                  pipeline;
};

{% endhighlight %}

So ... who owns these? Who should be responsible for destroying them? Pipeline layouts and shader modules are commonly shared
between multiple pipelines. I don't have a good answer for any of this, so I can't make any smart decisions about this data.
So I just pass the data out and leave the user to manage freeing these resources. Not very good.

You could wrap this stuff up in reference counted pointers, like `std::shared_ptr`s for instance, with a destructor that
frees their resources. That solves one problem: shared ownership. Which is a good start, but it doesn't address order of
destruction and makes reasoning about lifetimes harder. It doesn't really solve the problem, it just moves it.

The overarching problem though is that we're still thinking about ownership, when we should be thinking about scope.
To incorporate `ResourceScope`s took a few steps. First of all, the builder needs to keep track of what scope it is working in.
So in `GraphicsPipelineBuilder`'s base class - `IBuilder` - we make sure to store a reference to the working scope.

{% highlight c++ linenos %}

template<typename T>
class IBuilder {
    ResourceScope& r_scope;

public:
    IBuilder(ResourceScope& scope) : r_scope(scope) {}

    T build();
};

{% endhighlight %}

Then every time you create a resource which needs to be cleaned up later, you add a deferred cleanup command to the scope:

{% highlight c++ linenos %}

vk::ShaderModule IPipelineBuilder::loadShaderModule(const char* filename) {
    // ...

    vk::ShaderModule shaderModule = m_device.createShaderModule(/* ... */);
    
    r_scope.addDeferredCleanupFunction([=, device = m_device]() {
        device.destroyShaderModule(shaderModule);
    });

    return shaderModule;
}

// ...

vk::ResultValue<vk::Pipeline> GraphicsPipelineBuilder::build() {
    // ...

    vk::ResultValue<vk::Pipeline> pipelineResult = m_device.createGraphicsPipeline(
        VK_NULL_HANDLE,
        createInfo
    );

    if (pipelineResult.result != vk::Result::eSuccess)
        return vk::ResultValue<vk::Pipeline> { pipelineResult.result, VK_NULL_HANDLE };

    r_scope.addDeferredCleanupFunction([=, device = m_device, pipeline = pipelineResult.value]() {
        device.destroyPipeline(pipeline);
    });

    return vk::ResultValue<vk::Pipeline> { vk::Result::eSuccess, pipelineResult.value };
}

{% endhighlight %}

I've just started experimenting, and this simple little class is already making this project go a whole lot smoother
than my previous attempt.
